From Philharmonic Hall in Lincoln Center
home of the world's greatest musical events,
the Shell Oil Company brings you the
New York
Philharmonic YOUNG PEOPLE'S CONCERTS
under the musical direction of
Leonard Bernstein.
And here is Mr. Bernstein.
My dear young friends: On our last
program we devoted so much time to
introducing our new Philharmonic Hall to
you, and to introducing you to the new
science of acoustics, that we didn't get
to talk very much about music. So this time
we're going to make up for it, and
concern ourselves with the real meat and potatoes of
music -- the main course: melody.
Most people, when they think of music; think of melody right away,
to some people it's almost the same thing
-- melody; music. That's the whole meal.
And they're right, in a way,
SKIPPED
even though there are also such things in music as rhythm and harmony and counterpoint and orchestration; but melody is the main course,
because what is music anyway but sounds that change and move along in time?
And that's practically a
definition of melody, too: different
notes that move along in time,
one after the other. Well, if that's true,
(TO PIANO)
then it's almost impossible to write music that
doesn't have melody in it. I mean, if a
melody is simply one note coming after
another,
how can a composer avoid writing
melodies all the time?
He writes one note,
then he writes another,
and he's already got a tiny two-note melody.
That's a melody -- sort of.
If he adds a third note
it begins to sound a little more melodic,
and if he then adds a few more
well, we've got Mendelssohn's Wedding March.
You see? Simple. Where there's
music, there has to be melody. You can't
have one without the other. Then why do
so many people complain about music that
has no melody? Some people say they don't
like Bach fugues, because they don't find
melody in them. And others say the same
thing about Wagner operas, and others
about modern music, and others about jazz.
What do you suppose they mean when they
say "no melody"? What are they
talking about? Isn't any string of notes
a melody? Well, I think the answer is in
the fact that melody can be a lot of
different things: it can be a tune,
or a theme, or a motive, or a long melodic
line, or a bass line, or an inner voice
-- all those things: and the minute we
understand the differences among all
those kinds of melody, then I think we'll
be able to understand the whole problem.
You see, people usually think of a melody
as a tune, something you go out
whistling, that's easy to remember, that
"sticks in your mind."   Now a tune
is usually complete in itself -- that is, it
seems to have a beginning, middle and
end,
and leaves you feeling satisfied -- in
other words, it's a song, like God Save the Queen, or Gershwin's
Summertime, or Schubert's Serenade.
But in
symphonic music, which is what we're
mostly concerned with here, tunes aren't
exactly in order, because
being complete in themselves, tunes don't cry
out for further development. And, as you'll
remember from our former programs,
development is the main thing in
symphonic music -- the growing and changing of a melodic
seed into a whole symphonic tree. So that
seed mustn't be a complete tune, but
rather a melody that leaves something
still to be said, to be developed
-- what is called a theme.
Well, that's already a disadvantage to those people who are always expecting
music to have full-blown tunes,
and so they'll naturally find these incomplete
themes less melodic.  I suppose,
then, that they should complain about the
famous opening 4-note theme of
Beethoven's Fifth Symphony:
which is hardly melodic at all.  Or about
this theme from his 7th Symphony:
which is all one note.
But both of those themes are kinds of
melodies, you must remember, even though they're not tunes.
Of course, there are themes that
are much more tuneful than those. Only
think of Chaikovsky's Sixth Symphony
Why that's practically a whole
tune in itself.  Now what is it about that big,
tuneful theme that makes it so
attractive and beloved --
besides the fact that Chaikovsky
was a melodic genius?  The answer is
repetition -- either exact repetition, or
slightly altered repetition, within the
theme itself. It's that repetition that
makes the melody stick in your mind; and
it's the melodies that stick in your
mind that are likely to please you the
most.
For instance, let's just
see how Chaikovsky went about building
up that lovely theme by
simply repeating his ideas in a certain
arranged order -- what I like to call the
1-2-3 method. The fascinating thing is that so many
famous themes are formed by exactly this
method; and so I think you ought to know
about it. Here's how it works: first,
there is a short idea, or phrase;
2nd, the same phrase is repeated,
but with some small variation;
and 3rd, the tune
takes off in a flight  of inspiration.
It's like a 3-stage rocket, or
like the count-down in a race:  on your
mark,  get set, go!
Or in target practices: ready, aim, fire!
Or in a movie studio: lights, camera,
action!
It's always the same, 1, 2, and
3! There are so many examples of this
melodic technique I almost don't know
where to begin,  But take, for
example, our good old stand-by, Beethovens
Fifth, On your mark;
get set; go!
Or, do you know that
haunting tune in the Cesar Franck
Symphony? Same thing. First,
a phrase;
then repeat with a slight
change, a rising intensity;
then the take-off.
Or Mozart's
Haffner Symphony: ready, (ORK) aim,  (ORK) fire!  (ORK)
SKIPPED
The slow movement of Rimsky-Korsakoff's  Scheherazade,  (ORK) (V.O.)  A phrase:  same phrase, altered:  conclusion.
And so on. There are millions of them,
examples of this 1-2-3 design;
and don't forget that the heart of the
matter is repetition:  2 is always a
repeat of 1.
Now that we know a few of the
secrets that make music sound melodic,
let's start looking for some of the
reasons why people find certain kinds of
music unmelodic.  We've already discovered
that what appeals to people most as
melody is a fully spun-out tune,
and that when they get instead an
incomplete tune, or a theme, they begin to
have trouble.  So you can imagine that
when they hear music made out of
melodies that are even shorter than
themes, they have even more trouble. For
example, to return to that famous 4-note opening of
Beethoven's Fifth:
That's so short it's not really even a theme,
but what is called a motive. Now a motive,
can be as little as 2 notes, or 3
or 4, -- a bare melodic seed -- the raw
material out of which longer
melodic lines are made. You remember
I said that certain people find Wagner's
operas unmelodic? This is why: because
Wagner usually constructed his huge
operas out of tiny little
motives, instead of writing regular tunes
such as the Italian opera composers used.
But how wrong they are to say that Wagner
doesn't write melody!
He writes nothing but melody, only it's
made out of motives. Let me
show you how.  You've all heard the prelude to his
great opera, Tristan & Isolde, I'm sure.
It begins with a 4-note motive.
Now immediately comes another
motive, also of 4 notes. Now the
exciting thing is the way Wagner puts
these two motives together:  he  makes the
second motive begin smack on the end of
the first one, so that the last note of
one and the first note of the other are
joined, locking the two
motives securely together. Like this:
Now he adds some marvelous harmony underneath, and
this is what you get, as the beginning of
Tristan:
Now that's already much more than a
motive, or even of two motives -- it has
become what is called a phrase, just as a
series of words in a language is called a
phrase. And Wagner, by using this method
of joining motives together and making
phrases out of them, and then sentences
out of the phrases, and paragraphs
out of the sentences. Finally turns out a
whole story, a prelude to Tristan that is
a miracle of continuous melody that seems to have no
end, even though there isn't a
tune anywhere in it! Do you begin to see
what I mean by understanding melody in a
different way? If you think you don't
just listen to a couple of minutes of
this famous prelude now, and I'm sure
you'll be surprised to find that you do
understand it very well.
Well, that's a, lot of
melody for a composer who is supposed to
be unmelodic. We have seen how his melody grows,
starting with a motive,
then growing to a phrase, then to sentences.
SKIPPED
And it's not an unusual method of making melody, at all; I've even done it myself, in a more modest way. How many of you know the music of West Side Story? Well, what I like most about that music is how much of it grows out of a simple motive at the beginning of the score -- do you remember it?
That's the gang call of The Jets --- you hear them whistling it all through the show to call each other. Well, all it is is 3 notes;
but by juggling them around,
and changing their order,
all kinds of new melodies suddenly come to life.
For instance, in this order
the 3 notes give us:
And the same three notes, put into a jumping jazz rhythm, turn out to be a song named "Cool"
And there are many other ways in which this 3-note motive was used, but I don't want to take time to plug my own music.  I just want you to see how common it is for melody to grow out of motives; everybody does it, even me.  So you see, little motives are as much a part of melody as anything else.
But now comes an even more
serious problem
-- counterpoint.
That's what mostly gets in people's way when they are trying to hear a melody.
They are always complaining about "those dry, difficult Bach Fugues! How can I hear the melody when there is so many things going on at once?""
SKIPPED
Well, your answer to that is:  "Just  open your ears and listen."   You see, people normally expect a melody to be on top of the music, with an accompaniment underneath, like a Chopin Nocturne. But why does it have to be on top? The melody can be on the bottom, or in the middle as well, as in any Bach fugue; but that doesn't make it any the less melodic. It may be a little harder, to have to look for the melody, instead of having it served to you on a silver platter, but think how much greater the satisfaction is when you find it! Now here's the start of a Bach fugue -- a very short theme, but perfectly melodic. Now it gets developed, as new voices join in the discussion, stating the same theme while other voices go on to other melodic statements at the same time.
You see how the main subject keeps turning up in different voices -- way down in the bass, or up on top, or in the middle? While the other voices go on singing other melodies.
So it's certainly not an absence of melody, not by a long shot; in fact,
it's an overabundance of melody;
SKIPPED
the whole fugue is one long outpouring of melody, just like the Tristan Prelude; only you have to know how to listen for the melody, and where to find it. So don't let anyone scare you with that terrible word counterpoint.
Counterpoint doesn't erase melody; on the contrary, it multiplies it.
SKIPPED
So it all adds up to what I said in the beginning; melody can be many kinds of things, and you mustn't expect it to be always the same thing -- namely, just a tune. It can be a short theme, or even a shorter motive; or it can appear in company with other themes, as in counterpoint, on top, or at the bottom, or in the middle.  But it's always melody, no matter how involved it gets in symphonic development.
Now that's a lot of hard stuff we've been
discussing so far; and so to make it
clearer, we're going
to play you a whole movement from a
Mozart Symphony, the 1st movement of
his great G-Minor Symphony, which will
illustrate everything we've been talking
about. I'm sure you all know the
beautiful, famous theme that opens this movement
-- a perfect example of the
1-2-3 method we learned about
before; first, a phrase;
second, repeat the same phrase,
slightly altered;
and, third, the
take-off.
Now certainly nobody will quarrel with that
as being unmelodic; it has such a
beautiful shape, and arch.
But in the course of
the movement, as the theme is being
developed, there are
places that might be called unmelodic,
or less melodic. But you're ready
now to understand that even those places
are melodic, as much as the opening theme
is -- if you just listen to them correctly.
For instance, you'll notice that the very
first two notes of the main theme
form a little motive by
themselves,
a motive that is used all through the movement.
SKIPPED
Do you remember how the theme ended just now?
That's the same motive
as the one at the beginning,
only it's rising
instead of descending.
Then later, while
one part of the
orchestra is playing with that motive
the strings are playing
the same motive,
only stretched out in long notes:
So that together, it makes this
wonderful sound.
And that's all made out of those first
little 2 notes!
So you see it's all pure melody,
even the development parts. The same
is true of this seemingly unmelodic section:
Some people would say that
passage lacks melody; but the theme is
right there, only down in the bass
instruments:
while on top
there is exciting counterpoint going on,
as in a Bach fugue.
You just have to learn to listen for
melody in the depths of music,
not only on top.
And if you do,
how different that same
passage will sound to you!
What's even
harder is to hear melody that's neither
on top nor at the bottom, but in the
middle,
sandwiched in. Here's one place
you should be on the  lookout
for, where again the little
motive is being developed on top, over
stationary notes on the bottom:
But in the middle, two
clarinets are having their say about that
motive:
And they're so sweet and tender that it
would be a shame if you missed them.
Listen
to the whole sandwich now, top, bottom,
and peanut butter:
Well, I think you're ready now to
hear this great movement by Mozart, and
to listen to it as melody, all of it, from
start to finish,
not just the themes themselves, but the
development of the themes and
motives as well, in all their
counterpoint. It's all melody -- every
moment.
Well, so far we've discussed
a few of the reasons why some people
find certain music unmelodic --
like melodies going against each other, as they do in
counterpoint, or a melody singing away
down in the bass, not easily recognized,
or buried in the middle of a sandwich; or a melody
constructed out of tiny motives.
But the really
important reason -- and I guess this is
what I've been coming to all this
time -- is the question of what our ears
expect -- in other words, taste.
And that, in turn, is based on what our
ears are used to hearing.
For instance, we've seen today how important
repetition is in making a melody easy to
latch on to.
SKIPPED
We're used to that technique -- it's the technique used by popular songwriters: they drum their phrases into your head.
OK -- so what happens when we hear melodies that don't repeat at
all, that just weave on and on, always new?
Well, it's true that we usually like them
less -- at first. But that doesn't mean
they're any less melodic; in fact, the
farther away you get from that kind of
repetition, the
harder the melodies get to latch on
to, but also the nobler and
more beautiful they can become. Some of the
really greatest melodies ever written
are of this kind, non-repeating long
lines; but they're not necessarily the
ones people go around whistling in the
streets.
I remember so well the day my
piano teacher brought me a new piece to
study,
Bach's Italian Concerto, when I was 14 years old;
and when I began to read the second movement,
with its long, noble, ornamental melody line,
I simply couldn't understand it.
It just seemed to wander around, with no place to
go. Do you know it?
It goes like this:
And so it goes weaving on, spinning out that
long golden thread, never once repeating
itself for almost five minutes.
I find that melody one of the glories of all music,
now today; but I sure didn't think so
when I was 14.
SKIPPED
Why did it seem to me so wandering and aimless? Because every phrase is new and different, instead of repeating previous phrases; and I was still young enough to think that every melody had to be a tune,
because that's what my
brief musical experience had taught my
ears to expect.  In exactly the same
way that our tastes change with growing up,
and hearing all kinds of music,
so people's tastes change from one
period of history to another.
The melodies people loved in Beethoven's
time would have shocked and startled the
people of Bach's time, 100 years earlier,
and I'm equally sure that some of
today's modern music, which people
complain about as ugly and unmelodic, will
be perfectly lovely, charming every-day stuff to
the people of tomorrow. Let us
play you a perfect example -- another long,
non-repeating melodic line by the great
Modern German composer Paul Hindemith.
Hindemith wrote this melody over 30
years ago, in a piece called Concert
Music for Strings and Brass; and I
suppose there are still people who will call
this unmelodic, even after 30 years. But I consider it one of the
most moving and beautifully shaped
melodies, not only of modern music, but of
all music; and I have a feeling that
you'll agree with me, after all you've
learned about melody today
Now that is a melodic line, four
minutes of beautiful curves, arches, peaks
and valleys.
And if there are any of you who did not
like it, who found it unmelodic, awkward, or
graceless, let me comfort you by saying
that those were just the words
used 80 years ago about another
German composer named Brahms.  Now these
days, when we think of melody, we almost
immediately think of Brahms; but
there was a time when people complained
bitterly about his music as
totally lacking in melody. And so, to wind
up our program on melody,
and to show you how careful you have to be in
judging melody,
We are going to
play for you the last movement of Brahms
4th Symphony -- an extraordinary
movement for many reasons, but chiefly
for the reason that its main theme isn't a melody at all.
It's nothing but a scale of six notes
plus two notes to finish it off;
8 notes  in all, one to
a bar,
And out of those 8 bars comes a series of
30 variations, each one exactly 8
bars long, and each one containing those
same 8 simple notes, always in the
same key.
That's the whole movement. Now
that doesn't sound very promising in
terms of melody, does it?
And yet, what Brahms gives us in
this movement is a work of such glowing,
fiery melodic invention as to leave us
gasping. How does he do it?
By inventing new melodies in
counterpoint to that main theme, by a brilliant use of motives --
but I'm sure you'll hear all that without my telling you.
You're ready now to listen to this
so-called unmelodic work of Brahms, and hear it for the magnificent
outpouring of melody that it really is.
And if you're still wondering what a
melody is, just listen to this Brahms movement, and
you'11 have the answer: melody is exactly
what a great composer wants it to be.
From Philharmonic Hall in Lincoln Center --
another NEW YORK PHILHARMONIC YOUNG
PEOPLE'S CONCERT under the musical
direction of Leonard Bernstein has been presented by the Shell Oil Company.
This concert -- "What is a Melody?" -- featured the
music of Wagner, Mozart, Hindemith, and Brahms.
The next concert in the YOUNG PEOPLE'S series will be presented in four weeks on Monday, January 14th, at which time Mr. Bernstein will present a concert featuring Young Performers.
The preceding program was
prerecorded and was produced and
directed by Roger Englander.